Updated getting started doc (#2698)
google/flax: docs/getting_started.md

    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.8
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "6eea21b3"}

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/flax/blob/main/docs/getting_started.ipynb)
[![Open On GitHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open-on%20GitHub-blue?logo=GitHub)](https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/docs/getting_started.ipynb)

> # Quick Start

Reviewer: Nit: Both "quickstart" and "quick start" seem to be OK. To be consistent with "JAX Quickstart", would it make sense to name our doc "Quickstart" (one word) or "Flax quickstart"?

Welcome to Flax!

Flax is an open source Python neural network library built on top of [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax). This tutorial demonstrates how to construct a simple convolutional neural
network (CNN) using the [Flax](https://flax.readthedocs.io) Linen API and train
the network for image classification on the MNIST dataset.

+++ {"id": "nwJWKIhdwxDo"}

## 1. Install Flax

```{code-cell}
:id: bb81587e
:tags: [skip-execution]

!pip install -q flax
```

+++ {"id": "b529fbef"}

## 2. Loading data

Flax can use any

> data-loading pipeline and this example demonstrates how to utilize TFDS. Define a function that loads and prepares the MNIST dataset and converts the

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
data-loading pipeline and this example demonstrates how to utilize TensorFlow Datasets (TFDS). Define a function that loads and prepares the MNIST dataset and converts the
```

Since we haven't mentioned TFDS before, it may help to spell out the full name of the library

  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "6eea21b3"}

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/flax/blob/main/docs/getting_started.ipynb)
[![Open On GitHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open-on%20GitHub-blue?logo=GitHub)](https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/docs/getting_started.ipynb)

# Getting Started

Welcome to Flax!

> Flax is an open source Python neural network library that's built on top of [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax). This tutorial demonstrates how to construct a simple convolutional neural

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
Flax is an open source Python neural network library built on top of [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax). This tutorial demonstrates how to construct a simple convolutional neural
```

> network (CNN) using the [Flax](https://flax.readthedocs.io) Linen API and train

Reviewer: Nit: "and train it..."

[pull request](https://github.com/google/flax/compare)
to synchronize this Colab with the actual example.

+++ {"id": "nwJWKIhdwxDo"}

> ## 1. Install Flax

Reviewer 2: Should we remove the numbering (1, 2, ...)? Doesn't add much to the document IMO but makes it annoying to maintain.

Reviewer: IMO, it helps follow all the steps especially for new Flax users.

> [pull request](https://github.com/google/flax/compare)

Reviewer 2: This is no longer true as we've heavily modified the notebook. Maybe we should remove this note?

to synchronize this Colab with the actual example.

+++ {"id": "nwJWKIhdwxDo"}

## 1. Install Flax

```{code-cell}
:id: bb81587e
:tags: [skip-execution]

!pip install -q flax
```

+++ {"id": "bbc9b4f2"}

## 2. Imports

Import JAX, [JAX NumPy](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.numpy.html),
Flax, ordinary NumPy, and TensorFlow Datasets (TFDS). Flax can use any
data-loading pipeline and this example demonstrates how to utilize TFDS.

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 54
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500846075
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300

> id: a9633134

Reviewer: Can assist with cleaning up the Colab Jupyter metadata. @IvyZX may also have a method.

---
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp                # JAX NumPy

from flax import linen as nn           # The Linen API
from flax.training import train_state  # Useful dataclass to keep train state
from flax import struct                # Flax dataclasses

import numpy as np                     # Ordinary NumPy

> import optax                           # Optimizers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import optax                           # Optax for common losses and optimizers
```

> import tensorflow as tf                # Tensorflow to operate on TFDS

Reviewer: Nit: "TensorFlow"

Maybe: 

```suggestion
import tensorflow as tf                # TensorFlow for certain ops
```

WDYT?

TF is used for like `tf.random.set_seed(0)` as well as `tf.cast()` and setting dtypes for e.g. `tf.float32`.

TFDS is `tensorflow_datasets` (package), isn't it?

import tensorflow_datasets as tfds     # TFDS for MNIST
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt        # Visualization
```

+++ {"id": "b529fbef"}

## 3. Loading data

Define a function that loads and prepares the MNIST dataset and converts the
samples to floating-point numbers.

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 52
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500846272
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: bRlrHqZVXZvk
---
def get_datasets():
  """Load MNIST train and test datasets into memory."""
  train_ds = tfds.load('mnist', split='train')
  test_ds = tfds.load('mnist', split='test')

  train_ds = train_ds.map(lambda sample: {'image': tf.cast(sample['image'], tf.float32) / 255., 'label': sample['label']}) # normalize train set
  test_ds = test_ds.map(lambda sample: {'image': tf.cast(sample['image'], tf.float32) / 255., 'label': sample['label']}) # normalize test set

  return train_ds, test_ds
```

+++ {"id": "7057395a"}

## 4. Define network

Create a convolutional neural network with the Linen API by subclassing

> [Module](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html#core-module-abstraction).

Reviewer: Nit:

In other guides we are/started using "Flax Module" since "module/Module" is a common word.

Maybe here:

```suggestion
[Flax Module](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html#core-module-abstraction).
```

And then repeat this, which can help new users.

    return x
```

+++ {"id": "hy7iRu7_zlx-"}

### View model layers

Create an instance of the Module and use the [`Module.tabulate`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#flax.linen.Module.tabulate) method to visualize a table of the model layers by passing an RNG key and template image input.

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: lDHfog81zLQa
outputId: d53ae584-c402-4898-a363-4a470e3488e4
---
cnn = CNN()
print(cnn.tabulate(jax.random.PRNGKey(0), jnp.ones((1, 28, 28, 1))))
```

+++ {"id": "db132446"}

## 5. Define loss

We simply use `optax.softmax_cross_entropy()`. Note that this function expects both `logits` and `labels` to have shape `[batch, num_classes]`. Since the labels will be read from TFDS as integer values, we first need to convert them to a onehot encoding.

Our function returns a simple scalar value ready for optimization, so we first take the mean of the vector shaped `[batch]` returned by Optax's loss function.

```{code-cell}
:id: 38ef582d

def cross_entropy_loss(*, logits, labels):

>   labels_onehot = jax.nn.one_hot(labels, num_classes=10)
>   return optax.softmax_cross_entropy(logits=logits, labels=labels_onehot).mean()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  return optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(
    logits=logits, labels=labels).mean()
```

    return x
```

+++ {"id": "hy7iRu7_zlx-"}

### View model layers

> Create an instance of the Module and use the [`Module.tabulate`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#flax.linen.Module.tabulate) method to visualize a table of the model layers by passing an RNG key and template image input.

Reviewer: As before:

```suggestion
Create an instance of the Flax Module and use the [`Module.tabulate`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#flax.linen.Module.tabulate) method to visualize a table of the model layers by passing an RNG key and template image input.
```

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 100
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500846720
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: lDHfog81zLQa
outputId: db2822ca-c9a4-4dec-c67b-a6788933bb2f
---
cnn = CNN()
print(cnn.tabulate(jax.random.PRNGKey(0), jnp.ones((1, 28, 28, 1))))
```

+++ {"id": "db132446"}

## 5. Define loss

> We simply use `optax.softmax_cross_entropy()`. Note that this function expects both `logits` and `labels` to have shape `[batch, num_classes]`. Since the labels will be read from TFDS as integer values, we first need to convert them to a onehot encoding.

Reviewer: Nit:
- Add a link to the Optax softmax cross entropy API doc and mention Optax since it's an external library.
- If you can, use "second person" like "you"/"your" (Google Style Guide).

For example:

```suggestion
For your loss, use a predefined [`optax.softmax_cross_entropy()`](https://optax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#optax.softmax_cross_entropy) from the Optax library. Note that this function expects both `logits` and `labels` to have shape `[batch, num_classes]`. Since the labels will be read from TFDS as integer values, first convert them to a one-hot encoding.
```

> Our function returns a simple scalar value ready for optimization, so we first take the mean of the vector shaped `[batch]` returned by Optax's loss function.

Reviewer: Nit:

- If you can, use "second person" like "you"/"your" (Google Style Guide).

```suggestion
Your function returns a simple scalar value ready for optimization, make sure to first take the mean of the vector shaped `[batch]` returned by Optax's loss function.
```

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 52
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500846912
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: 38ef582d
---
def cross_entropy_loss(*, logits, labels):
  labels_onehot = jax.nn.one_hot(labels, num_classes=10)
  return optax.softmax_cross_entropy(logits=logits, labels=labels_onehot).mean()
```

+++ {"id": "4b5ac16e"}

> ## 6. Create train state

Reviewer: Nit: Since it's a Flax term/class maybe use

```suggestion
## 6. Create a `TrainState`
```

to pass around a single argument to functions like `train_step()` (see below).

Because this is such a common pattern, Flax provides the class
[`flax.training.train_state.TrainState`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.training.html#train-state)

> that serves most basic usecases. We can then subclass `TrainState` so that it also contains metrics.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
that serves most basic usecases. You can then subclass `TrainState` so that it also contains metrics.
```

```{code-cell}
:id: qXr7JDpIxGNZ

!pip install -q clu
```

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 53
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500847296
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: 7W0qf7FC9uG5
---
from clu import metrics

AverageLoss = metrics.Average.from_output('loss')

@struct.dataclass
class Metrics(metrics.Collection):
  accuracy: metrics.Accuracy
  loss: AverageLoss

class TrainState(train_state.TrainState):
  metrics: Metrics
```

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 54
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500847489
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: e0102447
---
def create_train_state(module, rng, learning_rate, momentum):

>   """Creates initial `TrainState`."""

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
  """Creates an initial `TrainState`."""
```

Create a separate function for loss and accuracy metrics. Loss is calculated using the previously defined [`cross_entropy_loss`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html#define-loss) function, while accuracy is calculated using `clu.metrics`.

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 1
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500847812
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: 961bf70b
---
@jax.jit
def compute_metrics(*, state, batch):
  logits = state.apply_fn({'params': state.params}, batch['image'])
  loss = cross_entropy_loss(logits=logits, labels=batch['label'])
  metric_updates = state.metrics.single_from_model_output(
    logits=logits, labels=batch['label'], loss=loss)
  metrics = state.metrics.merge(metric_updates)
  state = state.replace(metrics=metrics)
  return state
```

+++ {"id": "497241c3"}

## 9. Download data

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 421
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500848379
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: bff5393e
---
train_ds, test_ds = get_datasets()
```

+++ {"id": "809ae1a0"}

## 10. Seed randomness

> - Set TF random seed to ensure dataset shuffling is reproducible.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
- Set the TF random seed to ensure dataset shuffling (with `tf.data.Dataset.shuffle`) is reproducible.
```

- Get one
  [PRNGKey](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_autosummary/jax.random.PRNGKey.html#jax.random.PRNGKey)
  and use it for parameter initialization. (Learn
  more about
  [JAX PRNG design](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax-101/05-random-numbers.html)
  and [PRNG chains](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/design_notes/linen_design_principles.html#how-are-parameters-represented-and-how-do-we-handle-general-differentiable-algorithms-that-update-stateful-variables).)

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 2
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500848515
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: xC4MFyBsfT-U
---
tf.random.set_seed(0)
```

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 54
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500848728
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: e4f6f4d3
---
init_rng = jax.random.PRNGKey(0)
```

+++ {"id": "80fbb60b"}

> ## 11. Initialize train state

Reviewer: As mentioned before, maybe:

```suggestion
## 11. Initialize the `TrainState`
```

    for metric,value in test_state.metrics.compute().items():
      metrics_history[f'test_{metric}'].append(value)
    
    print(f"train epoch: {(step+1) // num_steps_per_epoch}, loss: {metrics_history['train_loss'][-1]}, accuracy: {metrics_history['train_accuracy'][-1] * 100}")
    print(f"test epoch: {(step+1) // num_steps_per_epoch}, loss: {metrics_history['test_loss'][-1]}, accuracy: {metrics_history['test_accuracy'][-1] * 100}")
```

+++ {"id": "gfsecJzvzgCT"}

## 13. Visualize metrics

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  height: 353
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 346
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500871338
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: Zs5atiqIG9Kz
outputId: 7cc6a375-83fe-4a29-fcac-9889212b8aed
---
# Plot loss and accuracy in subplots
fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(15, 5))
ax1.set_title('Loss')
ax2.set_title('Accuracy')
for dataset in ('train','test'):
  ax1.plot(metrics_history[f'{dataset}_loss'], label=f'{dataset}_loss')
  ax2.plot(metrics_history[f'{dataset}_accuracy'], label=f'{dataset}_accuracy')
ax1.legend()
ax2.legend()
plt.show()
plt.clf()
```

+++ {"id": "qQbKS0tV3sZ1"}

> ## 14. Inference on test set

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
## 14. Perform inference on the test set
```

Use the learned parameters to do model inference on the test set and visualize the images and their corresponding predicted labels.

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 98
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500871612
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: DFwxgBQf44ks
---

> for test_batch in test_ds.as_numpy_iterator():
>   test_state = compute_metrics(state=test_state, batch=test_batch)
>   pred = state.apply_fn({'params': state.params}, test_batch['image']) # model inference
>   break # get only the first batch
> pred = pred.argmax(axis=1) # argmax the logits to get predicted labels

Reviewer 2: Realistically we might want to create jitted function for inference e.g:
```suggestion
@jax.jit
def pred_step(state, batch):
  logits = state.apply_fn({'params': state.params}, test_batch['image'])
  return logits.argmax(axis=1) 

test_batch = test_ds.as_numpy_iterator().next()
pred = pred_step(state, test_batch)
```

Reviewer 2: Even if we don't create `pred_step` its better to use:
```python
test_batch = test_ds.as_numpy_iterator().next()
```
instead of `break` in the loop.

```

```{code-cell}
---
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 58
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500871794
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: 6482aa3G4E0T
---
def show_img(img, ax=None, title=None):
  """Shows a single image."""
  if ax is None:
    ax = plt.gca()
  ax.imshow(img[..., 0], cmap='gray')
  ax.set_xticks([])
  ax.set_yticks([])
  if title:
    ax.set_title(title)

def show_img_grid(imgs, titles):
  """Shows a grid of images."""
  n = int(np.ceil(len(imgs)**.5))
  _, axs = plt.subplots(n, n, figsize=(3 * n, 3 * n))
  for i, (img, title) in enumerate(zip(imgs, titles)):
    show_img(img, axs[i // n][i % n], title)
```

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  height: 866
executionInfo:
  elapsed: 981
  status: ok
  timestamp: 1671500872908
  user:
    displayName: Marcus Chiam
    userId: '17531616275590396120'
  user_tz: 300
id: 5d5nF3u44JFI
outputId: 22e013f6-b9b7-4088-84f3-caaf248377ce
---
show_img_grid(
    [test_batch['image'][idx] for idx in range(25)],
    [f'label={pred[idx]}' for idx in range(25)],

> )

Reviewer 2: All of this can be reduced to:

```python
fig, axs = plt.subplots(5, 5, figsize=(12, 12))
for i, ax in enumerate(axs.flatten()):
    ax.imshow(test_batch['image'][i, ..., 0], cmap='gray')
    ax.set_title(f"label={pred['label'][i]}")
    ax.axis('off')
```

```

+++ {"id": "edb528b6"}

> Congrats! You made it to the end of the annotated MNIST example. You can revisit

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
Congratulations! You made it to the end of the annotated MNIST example. You can revisit
```

Congrats may be considered as slang (https://developers.google.com/style/translation#be-inclusive)
